[MAN 44A panting]
[gasps]
Get away from me!
[roars]
[MAN 44A screams]
Seeing all the Ainu cise around.
We really made it
to Hokkaido, huh?
Yeah. We're finally back.
Let's keep going.
So. What's the next
step in your grand plan?
Got any ideas for how we're
supposed to find the gold
all by ourselves?
[SUGIMOTO sighs]
[ASIRPA] To start, we'd need
to get the skins that Hijikata
and Tsurumi have.
Or rather, steal them.
We could draw
both sides together...
...and let 'em fight.
Kill two birds with
one stone, you know?
[SHIRAISHI groans]
That's a lot easier
said than done.
By the way, Nispa.
Do you know of any easy ways
for us to make some money
around here for our travel fund?
Huh. I heard there's a kotan to
the south asking for help
slaying a dangerous wenkamuy.
[SHIRAISHI]
A wenkamuy?
Isn't that a bear that's
killed someone?
Yes. Supposedly, all the people
who were attacked and eaten
were looking for gold
in the river.
Wait, really?
[MAN 44B] And now everyone's
too scared of the wenkamuy
to go near there anymore.
[SUGIMOTO] There are still
rivers with gold in them?
Suppose I wasn't
lucky enough when I tried.
[MAN 44B]
According to the rumors,
there's a man who pans
for gold at the Uryu River.
And he's struck it
rich as of late.
If you want some money,
I'd say your best bet would be
to go out there
and try your luck.
I heard someone panned
enough gold to earn
50 yen in a single day.
[SUGIMOTO, SHIRAISHI]
A whole 50 yen?
[HEITA gasps]
[yelling]
[HEITA]
Somebody help me!
I don't wanna die!
[gasping]
[HEITA] Please, Dad!
Brother Taka! Brother Jiro!
Hurry! Please!
I'm slipping...
I can't hold on much longer!
Somebody--!
[SUGIMOTO, ASIRPA grunt]
Don't let go!
[gasps]
[HEITA sighs]
I can't thank you all enough.
You saved my life there.
[SUGIMOTO] You've got an injury,
you sure you're okay?
Oh. I'm fine, this is
actually from a while ago.
[HEITA]
He's so kind!
Hey, Heita!
I'm glad you're all right!
--Brother Taka!
--Huh?
Ah, I see!
You're looking for gold, right?
[HEITA]
Huh? We are.
I'm impressed you could tell.
That's great! We came here
to pan for gold ourselves.
We've actually heard there
was a lot along the river.
[SHIRAISHI chuckles]
[TAKA]
Hmm.
Wow! What a marvelous
coincidence!
There's still gold to be found
if you look for it!
[NORIKO]
What's going on?
Goodness, what an unusual
group of travelers!
They must be having such fun!
I was wondering, how do you
all know each other?
Oh my. You even have
a foreigner.
We're buddies.
Pals, just pallin' around.
Yeah, no. We're barely friends.
Noriko. Get back
to the hut, now!
[NORIKO groans]
We use a glass box to look
at the bottom of the river
as well as cracks in the rocks.
That's why some people call
this method of searching
"glass digging."
Then, you use a metal scraper
to dig out the gold
from in between the cracks.
It's an easy way to find big
chunks of gold that are trapped.
From the tools you
guys brought along,
it looks like you're
gonna try to pan for gold.
The tricky part about panning
is picking the perfect spot.
Yeah, you got that right!
I tried it once before but
didn't find a speck of gold.
You got any tips for
where we should start?
Just a hint?
Let me think for a second...
In this area, the best place
would probably be
under that big rock!
[SHIRAISHI groans]
[SHIRAISHI]
I can't do this anymore!
Asirpa! Hot water, please!
[SHIRAISHI sighs]
It's so warm...
[HEITA'S DAD] It's harder
during this time of year.
You can only search around four
hours in the middle of the day.
Not to mention, panning's
the least efficient way
to look for gold.
I should've known. This was
a fool's errand from the start!
[SUGIMOTO] That story about
someone making 50 yen
in a single day...
Guess it was a lie.
Oh, no, that was true,
I can confirm it.
Seeing as I'm the one
that they were talking about.
[gasping]
Wait, Heita!
That's enough from you!
They saved my life,
so they deserve to be told
what's going on. Do you know
what I mean when I say "white"?
Yeah, it's a color, isn't it?
[HEITA]
That's not quite it.
Here, allow me to explain.
For those who do
this professionally,
the nickname for gold is "red."
This substance, which is always
found mixed in with the gold,
is something we call "white."
But in reality, it's a metal
called platinum.
This platinum is
way harder than gold.
On top of that, it's resistant
to both heat and acid.
Jewelers hate the "white"
since it damages their tools.
And if we leave it mixed in
with the "red,"
it hurts the selling price.
We would have to
carefully pick the platinum
out of the gold by hand.
A process which took forever!
You see, in Japan, the "white"
can only be found in Hokkaido.
And the Uryu River
has an exceptionally
large amount of it.
Huh? Really?
Yeah, but get this.
Nowadays there are plenty of
people who'll pay a high price
for the "white"!
Up to three yen for one monme!
[grunting]
You've gotta be kidding me.
That's nearly the price of gold!
[HEITA] This guy had an arms
factory that closed after
the Russo-Japanese War.
So, he decided to be
the first Japanese man
to make fountain pens!
He collected fountain pens
from all over and examined
how they were produced.
He found that the hard
metal tips were actually
made from platinum!
He then realized that he could
source his own platinum
from deposits in Hokkaido!
We thought the "white"
was worthless,
but now it's getting more
and more valuable!
Not to mention other buyers
located outside of Japan.
Until recently, we would simply
throw the white stuff away.
We filled Hokkaido's
rivers with it!
We are witnessing the start
of Japan's second gold rush!
[BOTH gasp]
Uh...
[HEITA gasps]
Over there. Look!
The bear is back!
--[gasping]
--Stay alert! Where is he?
I saw him on that hill!
He was staring at us!
It looks like he ran off.
But he's been getting
closer and closer.
Only a matter of time before
something bad happens...
That's a wenkamuy.
[SUGIMOTO]
Hey, Asirpa.
Look. You see any tracks?
Nothing. Strange.
Could it have escaped
over the bamboo grass?
Maybe.
[ASIRPA]
A chakchak kamuy?
If there was a bear somewhere
nearby, it'd cry "Chakchak!"
And then it would do its best
to lead us to its location.
But it's quiet.
[HEITA]
Hmm... I can feel it!
This is the spot!
I bet you could find a whole
bunch of platinum around here!
You could probably get at least
ten monme in a single day!
[gulping]
I've got an idea!
Why don't we split our
findings with each other?
With this we can beat
50 yen in a day!
And it's better than risking
getting our faces ripped off
by a man-eating bear!
That's why everyone
stopped hunting.
They're polluting the river
looking for gold.
[BOTH] Heita, sir! Thank you
for your kind tutelage!
[HEITA]
Hmm.
[ASIRPA sighs]
About that tobacco case.
Is it Ainu-made?
Huh? Oh, you mean this thing?
I once spent time
hunting gold with some Ainu.
I ended up making friends with
them and they gave it to me
as a parting gift.
Ah, I see. Explains why
you know the word wenkamuy.
When I was a child,
I was told the Ainu stories
of the vicious wenkamuy.
I remember lying awake,
night after night.
I was so scared
that I couldn't sleep!
I was so terrified of leaving my
bed, I would just pee myself!
I feel bad for
poor little Heita!
It was the scariest thing
I've ever heard in my life!
You don't understand!
We've heard the rumors
about the wenkamuy, too.
They say it's already attacked a
lot of gold hunters around here.
No need to worry!
We're blessed to have a
bear-hunting specialist with us!
So you can fully focus on
finding that platinum!
You mentioned before
it was getting closer.
How long has it been
wandering around this area?
It's been hunting for years.
[gasps]
[NORIKO]
Do you like drawing?
It seems fun.
I know. Perhaps you
could do my portrait.
I'll sit still, and you draw.
[VASILI]
Hmm?
[NORIKO]
Follow me.
It's too cold to do it out here.
Come inside.
[NORIKO chuckles]
Make me look pretty.
[VASILI grunts]
So, what do you think?
Nice, right?
[gasps]
What's this?
But I thought I threw it away!
[sobs]
Noriko, what's going on in here?
[NORIKO] Don't yell.
I was just killing time.
[TAKA] That doesn't mean
you should be taking
your clothes off for
a man you just met!
Please, there's nothing
happening between us.
I just wanted a picture to
remind myself of my youth.
If I spend the rest of my life
watching you hunt for gold
on this mountain,
I'll be a wrinkled old lady
before you know it.
I'm sorry, okay?
It's my fault.
I'll be done soon.
[moaning]
[TAKA]
Once I make enough money here,
I'll open up a
business in Tokyo.
Hyah!
Huh? Wait.
Where's Master Heita?
He didn't wander off, did he?
I hope not. There's a
man-eating bear on the loose!
Hey, Asirpa! Looks like
Master Heita's missing!
Can you go make sure he's okay?
I don't think we'll be earning
any money if he ends up
getting pooped out of some bear!
If there's even a bear
in the first place.
[TAKA]
Hey, mister.
[VASILI grunts]
[TAKA]
Hmm?
[VASILI gasps]
[TAKA]
Are those yours? You see them?
Those binoculars.
Perhaps they belong
to one of your friends?
Well, they're on that
monkey chair mushroom.
I bet it was Noriko,
just playing a prank.
[VASILI grunts]
That was an amappo.
Be careful.
Trees trapped with an amappo
will have holes carved
into them, or are marked
to recognize it.
Watch out for those signs.
Somebody probably
set it up to catch deer.
As far as I can tell,
all the brown bears
are still in their dens.
I looked around the area
beyond were Heita was.
But I couldn't find any sign
of a matakarip nearby.
Which means,
it's more likely than not
that Heita's lying
about the bear.
Hey, Sugimoto, look at that!
Huh?
[SHIRAISHI]
Asirpa! The bear's over there!
[gasps]
We saw it, too!
Master Heita was right!
It's close!
Come on, we have to keep him
safe from the wenkamuy!
[gasps]
[screams]
[SUGIMOTO]
Huh... That's strange.
I swear that I
saw it around here.
[ASIRPA]
Stop walking around like that!
I can't tell your footprints
apart in the snow!
It's impossible that a brown
bear would have left no tracks.
But I don't see any.
[SUGIMOTO] Hmm. Okay,
we'll go after the bear.
You try to find Master Heita.
Take Mister Hood with you.
On it!
I'm coming, Dad.
Brother Jiro, too!
[TAKA] Amida Buddha protect me.
Amida Buddha protect me...
--Amida Buddha protect me...
--Huh? Who's praying?
[TAKA]
Amida Buddha protect me...
--Amida Buddha protect me...
--[squelching, crunching]
Amida Buddha protect me...
Amida Buddha protect--
[crunch]
[whimpering]
[HEITA gasps]
Are you hurt?
Heita! The bear got him!
It killed Taka!
No! Get away!
I didn't mean to!
Please don't tell Brother Taka.
Or he's gonna hit me again!
--Ah--!
--[squelching]
[panting]
It's your fault, Sister Noriko!
What're are you
doing here, Master?
Where's the bear?
[HEITA]
We have to run!
If we don't get out right now,
it's going to kill me next!
It's okay. Stay next to me,
I'll keep you safe.
Now, where did you see it last?
No! I'm a dead man walking.
I can feel the wenkamuy's
presence all around!
Get away from me,
or it'll eat you, too!
What does that mean?
[HEITA]
My Dad...
Brother Jiro...
Brother Taka...
It ate them all!
Mister Hood! We need your help!
Afterwards, I saw it eat
Sister Noriko, too.
It's all my fault.
I'm the reason why
the wenkamuy came that night.
Huh? Master Heita, uh...
Who are all these people
you're talking about?
[gasps]
[TAKA, HEITA] Noriko,
get back to the hut, now!
[NORIKO, HEITA]
What's going on?
Goodness, what an
unusual group of travelers!
So, what do you think?
Nice, right?
[ASIRPA] The bundle you
were carrying with you.
That's a bear pelt, isn't it?
Huh?
[gasps]
How did that end up there?
Hold on, what do you mean "how"?
You've been carrying it
on your back
like it was something important.
[HEITA] That can't be!
I keep throwing it away!
I burn it or dump it
in the river.
But the next thing I know,
I'm holding it my hands again!
[ASIRPA] Sugimoto, think back
to what you and Shiraishi saw.
Could it have been that pelt?
[HEITA gasps]
You have to get out of here!
Hurry!
I suspected this
for a while now.
But I think the wenkamuy
only exists in his head.
[HEITA groans]
[gasps]
Master Heita?
What's going on?
[squelching, crunching]
[gasping]
[HEITA huffing]
--[bone cracks]
--[SUGIMOTO grunts]
[roars]
[KADOKURA]
Heita Matsuda?
He was one of
the Abashiri inmates.
Ah. You wouldn't
believe that guy.
He was somethin' else.
This freak would do all sorts
of voices, and changed up
the way he talked.
Every now and then, he'd try
to sound like a sexy woman.
Ugh. It made my skin crawl.
Get this. According to him,
he had a bunch of other
people inside him.
And he wasn't putting on voices,
but instead,
letting the people out.
He was always going on about
a brown bear that he swore
was stalking him
outside of the prison.
[HEITA]
It's out there. Right outside.
He would call it a
something-kamuy or whatever.
An evil god that had
eaten a human being.
The wenkamuy.
Yeah, that's right.
He was scared to death of it.
He claimed that this
wenkamuy would attack,
then eat the people that lived
in his head, one after another.
When he's done with them,
the wenkamuy will eat me
and take control of my body.
After that happens, he forces
me to hunt somebody.
I have to murder them
to make it stop.
When I kill a person in the
real world, my body explodes
into pieces that splatter
all over the mountain.
And then I return
to being the old me.
The cycle never ends.
It happens again and again.
Where I'm from,
when a wenkamuy is defeated,
we don't harvest
its meat or use its pelt.
We chop up its body and
scatter it on the mountain.
He's probably referring
to that tradition.
[HEITA] The wenkamuy
has me in his claws.
I can feel it.
He's trying to make me
escape from this prison!
Where else could
these come from?
My body is covered
in these tattoos,
but I can't remember
how they got here!
Listen to him talk for
more than five minutes,
and you'd swear that it
was all bullshit.
But I got curious and
looked up his trial records.
He was found wearing the pelt of
a brown bear, ripping apart
the victim's body, taking their
flesh, and--Well, you know.
The Brown Bear Man,
Heita Matsuda.
If the story he told me is true,
he's probably still wearing that
pelt, hunting his next victim.
[SUGIMOTO growls]
[HEITA snarls]
[ASIRPA gasps]
Sugimoto!
[HEITA shrieks]
[SUGIMOTO groans]
[SUGIMOTO]
How is he so strong?!
[yells]
[grunting]
[HEITA snarls]
[yells]
[snarling]
[SUGIMOTO growling]
[roaring]
[SUGIMOTO grunting]
--[HEITA screaming]
--[BEAR roaring]
[gasps]
[HEITA] Nice work!
The wenkamuy is weakened!
[groans]
Now's my chance...
[gasps]
Sugimoto, are you all right?!
I won...
I finally beat the wenkamuy...
[ASIRPA]
The tree with the amappo.
[HEITA] I did my best
to lure you to this spot
so he wouldn't get suspicious.
We need to remove the arrow!
Quick, Asirpa, do something!
No, please, it's better
if you just leave.
After hearing the story of
the wenkamuy as a child,
I would always
see it in my head.
Behind every tree.
Hiding in every shadow.
I'd spend the whole day
working myself to the bone
digging for gold.
But my family would waste the
money before the day was up.
I wanted to punish them for
how greedy they'd become,
and how little they
cared about my efforts.
One day, I found an animal
corpse that a bear had saved.
So I took it home with me
and hid it underneath
where everybody slept.
It killed my entire family,
but before it could eat me,
an Ainu hunter slew it.
And its body
was chopped to bits.
After that, the wenkamuy came
back to life and devoured
my family again and again.
Somehow it knew about
my family's sins
and was punishing them.
And in the end, I was punished
for my own wrong-doings,
as well. The wenkamuy
consumed my flesh and soul
and forced me
to become a murderer.
The truth is, I wanted
someone to stop me.
And because of the kindness
you've shown me, Sugimoto--
by fighting off the wenkamuy--
I can now finally be rid of it.
The wenkamuy
are called evil gods.
But the Ainu believe those
who are slain were chosen by
the gods to be taken away
because they favored them.
You see, wenkamuy don't kill
people in order to punish them.
I think what happened was,
Heita only heard a part
of the Ainu stories.
Which created
a wenkamuy inside him
that should have never existed.
It's important to pass on
the truth properly.
So, you're saying it was
actually his lust for gold
that ruined his life, then?
Or perhaps there's something in
gold that drives men to madness.
Please don't die, Master Heita!
I still need you to tell me
where to dig next!
Master Heita!
[NARRATOR] Next time:
"Partner in Crime"!